The trunk show for Tinc - the tiny San Francisco-based fashion label - is New York Fashion Week's most achingly hip, most secretive event. It is held on a sticky day in early September, on the sixth floor of an anonymous warehouse building located 20 blocks down from the big tents and the main action of Bryant Park. Its designer, Savannah Knoop, greets a handful of fashion-week hipsters - the edgiest stylists, the most fashion-forward fashion editors - oh, and me. She rolls out her clothes on two chrome rails, so that we can cop a feel. She encourages us to try her creations on in the loos located halfway down a darkened corridor; she feeds us with farmers'-market brownies and a wine-punch concoction. There is no runway show, no models, no music, no scary clipboard ladies, and no reverence. Tinc is brilliant. Androgynous, sharp, well-structured, well-fitting, cooler than Christmas. I don't care that 'Tinc' means 'throwaway' in Thai; that it's as green, as a company, as it possibly can be; that the pieces are spiritual one-offs, individually numbered and fashioned from unusual fabrics. I don't care that the logo is a visual representation of the soundwaves created whenever anyone says 'I love you'. I just care that it's good. No doubt about it, Savannah Knoop is an excellent designer. But the other thing she is, is an excellent liar. Accomplished, adventurous, and daring. I know this because, for six years, Knoop lived a lie. For six years, Knoop perpetuated one of the biggest literary hoaxes of modern times. The Noughties have been an outstanding time for literary hoaxes. In 2006, James Frey was exposed as inventing parts of A Million Little Pieces, his memoir of a lifetime of drug addiction. This year, it transpired that Love and Consequences, Margaret B Jones's memoir of growing up as a mixed race, drug-running foster child in South Central Los Angeles, was the fabricated work of private-school-educated, all-white Margaret Seltzer. Stephen Glass turned his multiple journalistic hoaxes into a professional identity; his story became the subject of a 2004 film, his 2003 autobiographical account of the hoaxing having done very nicely indeed, thank you. But the best - the most extravagant, most starry, most decadent - literary hoax de nos jours, was committed in the name of JT LeRoy. Jeremiah 'Terminator' LeRoy was the Aids-afflicted, emotionally damaged son of a truck-stop prostitute, who'd spent his teenage years living rough on the streets of San Francisco and turning tricks, who'd had a male-to-female sex change; and who overcame all this, and more, to became a literary wunderkind. In 1999, his first novel - Sarah, the story of a child prostitute, which was presumed to be semi-autobiographical - was published, to critical acclaim; within a year, LeRoy was the darling of a hip, indie celeb crowd. He was friends with Winona Ryder (who claimed she met him before he was published, while he was still living rough, hanging about outside the opera house, 'a real ragamuffin'), with photographer Juergen Teller, with Courtney Love. Madonna sent him Kabbalah readings; he was a confidant of Liv Tyler ('who told him everything'). He made the cover of Vanity Fair - in 2003, the magazine ran a gushing story on him, in which they praised his writing abilities extravagantly ('To literary critics and his fellow writers, JT LeRoy has distinguished himself as a precocious talent able to mine golden prose from his white-trash childhood ...'); drew comparisons with immense cultural icons ('In public, LeRoy maintains a Warhol-like mystique. He wears wigs, female apparel, and oversize sunglasses, and he seldom says a word. And yet he can give better phone than Warren Beatty, drawing powerful women into his world with his raspy, girlish drawl') and wondered whether or not his ever-expanding coteries of adoring female celebrity fans will 'make his career, or break it?' (In March 2005, he also made the cover of the Observer Magazine, which ran a reverent and sincere interview with him.) He was a house-guest of Carrie Fisher. Shirley Manson wrote a song about him; the actor Michael Pitt played an approximation of him in Gus Van Sant's adaptation of his collection of short stories, The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things. Designers clamoured to dress him, magazine editors clamoured to commission him. Asia Argento - the Italian film actress and director - had a relationship with him. For six years, JT LeRoy was the hottest, hippest, brightest, most intriguing literary sensation in the world. Which was great, except - he didn't exist. His books were written by Laura Albert, a fortysomething woman who had been a punk, a phone-sex worker, and a porn author, but had never lived on the streets of San Francisco or worked as a teenage prostitute. Savannah Knoop - Albert's twentysomething sister-in-law - had played JT publicly. Knoop bound her breasts, and wore a preposterous blonde wig and sunglasses, affected a West-Virginian accent; and appeared as JT whenever a physical boy was needed. Knoop gave JT's press conferences, she partied on his behalf, she travelled the world as him, doing readings and signings. She posed as him on photoshoots. She had dinners with the directors and actors who optioned LeRoy novels as films; she hung around on set and advised when these films were being made. She had friendships as JT. She had the love affair with Asia Argento. Everywhere she went, Knoop was accompanied by Albert, who posed as Speedie, JT's 'handler'. This allowed Albert to feed Knoop lines when necessary, and cover for any gaps in 'his' knowledge, any biographical discrepancies. For six years, it worked. People bought into JT, to a greater or lesser degree. They didn't ask too many questions. One journalist who spent time with JT LeRoy and Speedie when they came to London on a promotional tour says simply: 'We knew something was up, just not what, exactly. And it was fun; they were fun.' Then, inevitably, Albert and Knoop were found out. In October 2005, Stephen Beachy, a reporter from New York magazine, published his suspicions that JT LeRoy was the pen name of Laura Albert; shortly after that, Warren St John, a writer on the New York Times, published his suspicions that Knoop played JT's physical alter ego. The whole story emerged pretty quickly after that; Geoffrey Knoop (Knoop's half-brother; Albert's then husband), revealed everything he knew, in an article in the New York Times in February 2006. Two years of fallout ensued. Albert's was visible and intense - she was successfully sued for fraud by the film company who optioned Sarah; she split from Geoffrey Knoop. Savannah Knoop, meanwhile, slipped from public view - effortlessly, because no one really knew what she looked like. She was not legally accountable for the hoax; consensus among those celebrities (and non-celebrities) who had been hoaxed, was that they were less wronged by Knoop than by Albert, who, it was felt, had pulled the strings. But now, Knoop is revisiting the affair. She's written a book, Girl Boy Girl, an account of her six years as JT LeRoy; it's published in the UK next week. Laura Albert is extremely cross about the whole thing. When she heard that Knoop was planning a book, she said: 'I am not in any way connected with this book and it disgusts me. Just because you play a writer doesn't mean you are a writer. I think Savannah is being motivated by money and attention. Now that she's had to go back to being a civilian, this is her way of getting back to it. It's sad and it's sleazy. She's really stepping on my feelings ... I'm not interested in making a career of JT, I'm an artist.' But Knoop's unapologetic about her endeavour, and happy to tell to me all about it. So I meet Knoop at the Tinc trunk show. Knoop's always made clothes on the side - she is that kind of a girl. Since the demise of JT LeRoy, she's developed this dabbling into a serious fashion concern. No one else at the trunk show has ever heard of JT LeRoy. The editors and stylists are completely clueless about Savannah Knoop's brilliant and preposterous back story. Then I meet Mary Ellen Mark, the photographer who shot Knoop as JT LeRoy for Vanity Fair in 2003, and who was the only person to address the issue of JT's gender identity directly at that time. 'I've hung out with many transgendered people over the years,' Mark told JT, after their shoot, 'but I don't feel the residue of a boy with you. JT, you don't feel like a boy to me.' At the Tinc show, Mark embraces Knoop, who introduces her to me. You're the one who knew, I say. 'Of course I knew!' Mark tells me. She gestures up and down at Knoop, who is standing feet away from her. 'Look at her! She looks like a girl!' And she does. Knoop and I meet again, the following morning over brunch. 'Gosh, this all feels very ... intimate,' she says. Because I know lots about you from reading the book, I say. 'Right,' she says. 'And it's not that I ... wouldn't tell you those things after a while; but I wouldn't tell you off the bat.' We start with biographical facts, of which there are many more knocking around for JT LeRoy than for Savannah Knoop. Knoop tells me that she was born in 1981 ('the same year as JT, I think ...') which makes her 27, although she seems older. Her family is extravagantly extended. Her father, John Knoop, is a big deal on the San Francisco film-making scene; her mother, Sharon Hennessey, is an acupuncturist and teacher, writer and film producer. John already had three children when he met Sharon; together, they had a daughter, Hennessey (whose surname is Knoop, you'll be relieved to hear); 10 years later, they had Savannah. Knoop's parents split up when Knoop was five, John Knoop moved out, but maintained a decent relationship with his daughters. Knoop and Hennessey grew up to have close relationships with their half-brothers and sisters. She was, she says, 'a little weird, as a kid. I mean, I got on with other kids, but ...' (Knoop trails off a lot, leaves sentences unfinished, perhaps because she hasn't yet got her thoughts in order; perhaps, because this, too, is an evasive tactic she picked up while playing JT.) She went to an all-girls boarding school, which she really loved ('There was minimal cattiness compared with co-ed'); and she meant to go to college, but somehow didn't. 'I was floating, out of high school. Trying to work out what I wanted to be doing.' Her half-brother Geoff began a relationship with Laura Albert; they had a band called Thistle, they needed a singer, and they recruited Knoop. 'I didn't even want to be a singer. Can I sing? Kind of. Really, I think they were just looking for somebody who was ... younger.' Simultaneously Albert, who had written a smattering of short stories as JT LeRoy, was beginning to gain profile, and had realised that she'd need a physical JT. She began by approaching fey young men on the streets of San Francisco, and attempting to explain to them what it was she was looking for. She graduated on to butch young women. But she couldn't find anyone quite right. 'I was wishing, hoping, that Laura would ask me to do it,' Knoop says. 'In my mind, I thought: OK, you need these two slots to be filled - JT, and a singer for the band - and I'd rather be in that slot, the JT slot.' Why? 'I was intrigued by the idea of being someone else. I was obsessed by the whole idea of androgyny.' Because you're bisexual? She laughs. 'Queer. But, yeah...' You've had relationships with women as well as men? 'Yes.' Did that help you become a boy? 'Probably. It's about inhabiting both.' After trying unsuccessfully to recruit a stranger to play JT LeRoy, Albert saw a photo-booth snap of Knoop, and realised that she would make a good JT. Days later, Knoop bound her breasts for the first time, put on the blond wig and sunglasses as extra disguise, and posed for pictures that would accompany a small magazine interview Albert had already given over the telephone. She was petrified, but the shoot went well. Chris, the photographer ('I've forgotten his surname, and the name of the magazine'), accepted Knoop as JT. The story ran. They had, Knoop says, absolutely no idea what they were getting themselves into. 'I think we were both, like: let's try this out. But no. I don't think we had any idea what was going to happen.' Was Knoop perpetually scared she'd be found out? 'Yes! Terrified! Though she [Laura Albert] wasn't! She wasn't! I was constantly, so scared all the time. Every time we would do anything. But she always thought we'd be fine. It never crossed her mind.' What did you think would happen if you were discovered? 'I don't know. I just knew it would be bad.' It's hard to know exactly how things evolved from that point. Knoop's memory of the next six years is fractured and muddled; even after reading Girl Boy Girl, I'm not a lot clearer on what happened when. It's an excellent yarn, and it's well written (contrary to expectations, Knoop is a natural writer), but it is circuitous, and Knoop is not a rigorous researcher. When she forgets things - names, details, places - she makes something up, and asterixes the relevant section. Which is charming, but not exactly informative. What we do know is that, in the space of 18 months, JT LeRoy garnered a trendy and adoring public, a cult celebrity following and a luxurious lifestyle - although that wasn't a constant for Knoop. When she wasn't playing LeRoy, she went back to San Francisco where she waitressed in a Thai restaurant, and no one had any idea about her dual life. You had to work? 'Yes!' Playing JT didn't make you rich? She laughs. 'Nooooo!' Did the constant adjustments between the two lifestyles become confusing? 'It screwed with my head! There was nothing special about the way I was going through my early twenties - apart from JT. What I loved so much was harbouring that secret; and going back and being able to say to myself: these guys don't know what's going on! I'm here! And I'm there, too!' JT LeRoy's relationship with Asia Argento is perhaps the most intriguing element of Knoop's experiences. She says that she's lost contact with everyone she met as JT, apart from one man, who was so unsettled by the truth that he doubted everything for a while. 'There was this thing where he was looking at everything and going: is this real? Is this spoon real? It shook, you know, everything. The truth that he thought he ... had.' But he did not sleep with JT LeRoy. Asia Argento did. Asia Argento met JT LeRoy on a book tour in Italy for Harold's End, LeRoy's last novel. Argento had been emailing Albert, as LeRoy, for a few months before that, but she transferred all her attentions to Knoop. They began a relationship. Argento must have known something was up. 'She says she didn't! I don't think she can admit that she knew something was up. I think she probably did.' Because you were close - on every level. 'Right.' Physically close... Knoop laughs. 'Right! Everyone goes, she was so naive to think anyone could have had a perfect sex change. But I don't know ...' I ask her if she felt guilty about cheating Argento into a relationship with her; Knoop doesn't really answer. 'It was unsettling, to be with her, and not be ... although I spent enough time with her at the end, so that basically I felt like we connected on so many other things. And it was this whole thing. At some point, I told Asia that she should call me Savannah. I don't know why.' Perhaps so that you could merge JT's identity with your own? So you could feel like you were telling her the truth, without actually telling her the truth? 'Exactly. Right. It was all so close to the truth by that point. Anyway, she didn't call me Savannah. She always called me JT.' Did you fall in love with her? 'I don't know.' She seems exasperated. 'I question that. It wasn't quite falling in love. I wanted her ... to tell me I was OK.' Perhaps Knoop doesn't feel guilty about Argento because Argento hurt Knoop. When Argento, Knoop and Michael Pitt were working together on the film adaptation of The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things, Argento invited Knoop, as JT, and Michael Pitt, back to her hotel suite - and chose to spend the night with Pitt. Knoop was devastated; the whole episode is documented in Girl Boy Girl Do you think she's angry with you? 'I think she's angry.' Are you sorry for that? 'I feel like I want to talk to her about it.' Are you still angry with her over Pitt? 'To a degree.' Pause. 'I read an interview about how she felt ... and the only thing she said was, she honestly thought I was a boy, because I had such hairy legs. She'd never seen such hair on a girl's legs! And I think: that's all? I think that if she read the book, she would understand why I did it. But I think we should ... talk about it. Hash it out.' I like Knoop very much. She is charismatic and engaging, and I find it exciting that people still do these kinds of things - have these exciting, preposterous adventures. I think she wanted to write her story for all the reasons she gives me - to get it down, to get it straight, to 'stop it falling through the cracks'. But also I suspect that Laura Albert's right when she suggests that Knoop misses the limelight, and this is her attempt to reclaim it. Knoop says she doesn't want to be famous: 'No! Not at all!' But she freely admits to feeling incredibly lost once the hoax was exposed. She admits that she misses the experience of JT LeRoy desperately, and that she misses having secrets 'to the point that I started trying to get other secrets, new secrets'. She laughs about that. She tells me that she loved being JT, that it was addictive, and fun 'and exciting and glamorous! He was really glamorous!' Would she have ever stopped being him, if she hadn't been found out? 'No. I don't think so. No.' So maybe Savannah Knoop does want another go at celebrity, maybe she hasn't even quite admitted that to herself. She will say that she wants Tinc to grow, 'but not too big, I want to keep it close'; and that she wants Albert to make some peace with Girl Boy Girl. 'I think she just needs to start writing again.' So, I say, you want Laura Albert to get over it, and Asia Argento to get in touch? She grimaces. 'I don't want that to be, like, my calling card! No! Like: call me, Asia! No! If our paths are meant to cross, then they will.' Do you believe in all that? 'Probably not,' Savannah Knoop says. 'But sometimes - it happens anyway.' At a JT LeRoy press conference for 'his' last book, Harold's End, in Rome, Savannah Knoop, disguised as JT, is accompanied by her sister-in-law and 'manager' Laura Albert and Loretta from the Italian publishers. It was here that she met, for the first time, Italian actress Asia Argento, with whom she then had an affair. Loretta dragged me to the podium. I could hear everyone getting into their seats. There were red glowing blindspots burned into my retinas. I could barely see Asia and Laura settled into two seats in the front row. Loretta tapped at the microphone and started to introduce me in Italian. I was shaking, and every so often I would jerk my head, like I was trying to pull a crick out of my neck. She said something and everyone laughed wryly. I could tell she was wrapping it up now. 'I present JT.' They clapped. Laura gestured to me to say something. I mustered a low 'Hi'. Someone coughed. What were they waiting for? Were they second-guessing me? People raised their hands. Loretta pointed at them. She seemed to know all of them. 'Yes, Antonia.' Antonia shot off a question. Loretta nodded her head. She said, 'Ah, they want to know, what are the wig and glasses for?' I was relieved that we had started with something easy. 'Um,' I breathed heavily into the microphone, 'I put so much into the books. I wear the wig so that people won't recognise me, so that I can keep something for me that's personal. Same thing with my eyes.' I pushed a last breath into the microphone. The sunspots were receding. In practically all the interviews, this question came up in one form or another. The most direct had been in another city, when an interviewer said, 'You could be anybody. How do we know you are who you say you are? I mean, you sound like a woman to me.' The rest of the reporters muttered and shook their head at him, indignant that he had asked such a question. I would be saved each time by remembering Laura's rule: always go in further to get out. 'Um, you don't know. And you won't know. And I don't want you to know. JT could be back in Spokane, a 500-pound black man, like that guy, the voice of Elmo, right? Some people say I am Dennis Cooper. Some people say I am really Gus Van Sant. I like that. I mean, yer absolutely right. I could be anybody. As fer sounding like a woman, thank you.' I curtsied. 'You wrote on your website that writing is your lifesaver. Is it still true? Is it your raison d'être?' My raison d'être, I thought bitterly, is to put on a wig and speak in a lousy Southern accent. 'Uh, yeah. I think it is the same today ...' 'In your novel, Sarah says, "We all need someone to know who we really are". Today, do you know who you are?' 'Um, no. No, I don't think I do.' After it was over, the reporters took a flurry of pictures, and I realised that the sunspots were actually from flashbulbs. Loretta led me off the podium. I stubbed my sneakers on the bricks and stumbled off. • Girl Boy Girl: How I Became JT LeRoy is published by Seven Stories Press. Available from 6 November at amazon.co.uk; tincwear.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.